A baby moth's respiratory system is fixed in size at each stage of growth (instar). When a caterpillar is no longer able to breathe enough oxygen to sustain itself, it advances to the next instar by molting. During molting, it discards the old respiratory system and grows a larger one in its place.
After mating, pink-striped oakworm moth couples stay together long enough for the female to find a place to lay eggs.
Australia houses some of the most humongous moths in existence, such as the 10-inch wide, 1oz (30g), giant wood moth.
Some spiders can mimic the pheromones produced by female cecropia moths, luring unsuspecting male moths into their web.
During the day, nocturnal moths enter a sleep-like state called torpor. In this state, they only respond to strong stimuli such as wind or predator attacks.
Bagworm moths, a.k.a bagworms, build protective cases out of plant material strung together with silk.
Calyptra moths are notable for two things: 1) their camouflage that makes them look just like dead leaves; 2) they feed on the blood of large animals, including humans.
Caterpillars of the emperor gum moth change color each time they molt, going from black to green, blue, and yellow.
Cinnabar moths are able to absorb toxic substances from the plants they eat, becoming toxic themselves.
Flannel moth caterpillars are known for their long, fabulous hair. Their sting can cause a severe inflammation in humans, sometimes leading to headaches, nausea, and anaphylactic shock.
Fossilized evidence of moths goes all the way back to the late Triassic era, when the planet was a hot, dry, and arid wasteland. Scientists speculate that their proboscis allowed them to survive off of water droplets.
"Hummingbird moths" is an umbrella term that includes sphinx moths and death's head hawkmoths. Hummingbird moths can flap their wings up to 70 times per second (almost as fast as a hummingbird's 80 flaps per second).
In 2018, scientists created a neural network that replicates the tobacco hornworm moth's olfactory learning system. It allowed them to simulate the way a moth processes, learns, and reacts to, new smells.
In his first appearance, the Batman villain Killer Moth sets out to become the "anti-Batman", complete with a Mothcave, Moth-Signal, and Mothmobile.
In medieval times, butterfly and moth caterpillars were believed to be sinful creatures formed from mud through spontaneous generation.
In the 19th century, pollution from the industrial revolution caused light-colored trees to become blackened by soot. This presumably made white-bodied peppered moths easier for predators to spot, leading to a decline in their population, while black-bodied peppered moths thrived.
"Lightsheeting" or "mothing" is the practice of luring moths to observe or photograph them. The simplest lightsheeting setup consists a bright light aimed at a white surface.
Many female moths are very poor fliers, or just can't fly at all. They flap their wings in place to release pheromones. Males have very sensitive antennae that can detect as few as four molecules of pheromone.
Many moths lose their mouths when they evolve into they adult form. But this is fine because they don't need to eat. Adult moths only live long enough to find a mate and reproduce.
Many moths have evolved special scales on their wings and bodies that allow them to emit sounds between 11 and 212 kilohertz. They use these sounds to confuse bats, which rely on echolocation to hunt.
Moth caterpillars don't have lungs and don't actively breathe. Instead, they have 8 pairs of tubes called spiracles; the movement of their bodies allows air to pass through the spiracles.
Moths "smell" though their feathered antennae. Males often have larger feathers so they can more easily track female pheromones.
Moths don't have eyelids, and their large, glossy eyes make them very enticing to some predators. Because of this, some species have developed anti-glare layers on their eyes. They are called moth-eye structures and consist of microscopic bumps smaller than the wavelength of visible light.
Moths don't have muscles attached to their wings. Instead, they have two pairs of muscles inside their thorax that expand and contract the top of the thorax, causing the wings to flap up and down.
Moths probably can't experience love, understand art, or achieve enlightenment. Their brains only have around 1 million neurons, and lack a limbic system. For comparison, human brains have 90 billion neurons.
Moth species with a wingspan of 20mm or less are called micromoths.
Moths were the first insect that scientists discovered could see in the dark.
Moth wings are covered in scales arranged in overlapping patterns, like roof tiles.
When a moth gets its wings stuck in a spider's thread, the scales on its wings detach easily, allowing the moth to escape unharmed.
Most moths cannot survive very long in human households, because they feed on plants and flowers that are only found in the wild. Only a few species (carpet, clothes moths) have adapted to the food sources and higher light levels of human habitats.
Moths that live in humid habitats have wing patterns that reflect more UV light, presumably to help them hide from predators who also have ultraviolet vision.
Pine processionary caterpillar can link up to one another by their setae (bristles), forming long trains that allow them to travel together in a continuous line.
Some caterpillars can emit a silk rope that allows them to quickly rappel down from trees when they are threatened.
The caterpillar of the emperor moth is considered edible in much of southern Africa. It can be eaten raw, fried, or added to sauce to enhance the flavor.
The meat of white-lined sphinx moth caterpillarscontains almost as much fat as hamburger meat, but one-third less saturated fat, and more energy, protein, and carbohydrates. They were consumed by Native Americans of the Cahuilla tribe.
The "tails" at the end of the Luna moth's wings evolved to trick bats into thinking they're looking at two different targets.
The Bogong moth migrates twice a year, traveling distances of up to 600 miles. It uses a combination of the Earth's magnetic field and recognizable landmarks to stay on track.
The director of the 1961 Kaiju movie Mothra expressed hope that one day, Mothra would be remade as a Disney-esque animated film.
The eggs of bagworm moths have extremely hard shells. When a pregnant female bagworm is eaten by a bird, its eggs can pass through the bird's digestive system unharmed.
There are multiple theories on why moths are attracted to light. The main theory says they navigate by maintaining a constant angle to a distant light source, such as the moon, or the north star.
The tobacco hornworm's caterpillar can grow to ten thousand times its original weight in less than twenty days.
The silkworm is not a worm, but the caterpillar stage of the silk moth (Bombyx Mori). Due to breeding, silk moths have lost all pigmentation (camouflage) and the ability to fly.
Unlike many other moths, some hawkmoths are diurnal. They are pollinators, and their eyes can see blue, green, and ultraviolet light, allowing them to locate flowers by sight.
When ornate caterpillar moths don't get enough chemical alkaloids from the plants they eat, they may resort to eating larvae from their own species.
When threatened, caterpillars can extrude a fleshy, bright-colored horn called the osmeterium. This organ emits a strong odor that repels or kills ants, spiders, and mantids.